doc: Add tutorial about how to use CAT on UP2 (#2808)
projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor: doc/tutorials/using_cat_on_up2.rst

.. _using_cat_up2:

Using CAT on UP2
################

The UP Squared board `(UP2) <https://up-board.org/upsquared/specifications/>`_

> is an x86 maker board based on the Intel Apollo Lake platform, which support

Author: OK

> Cache Allocation Technology(CAT). With this feature, the usage of cache can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cache Allocation Technology (CAT). With this feature, the usage of cache can be
```

Author: OK

> restricted to each VM. ACRN hypervisor can do that by giving VM a cache mask,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
restricted to each VM. ACRN hypervisor can do that by giving each VM a cache mask,
```

Author: OK

so that the VM will not evict the masked cache lines, as shown in :numref:
`cache-mask-vm`:

.. figure:: images/using_cat_up2.png
   :align: center
   :name: cache-mask-vm

   Cache usage with Cache Mask

CAT Support on ACRN
*******************

As described at ``Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual``,

> chapter 17.17, volume 3. There are 3 steps to use CAT: detecting the CAT capability;

Reviewer 2: This would read better as:
```
There are 3 steps to use CAT: 

1. detecting the CAT capability;
2. setup cache mask array MSRs, also know as the Class of Service (CLOS) array; 
3. select one of the CLOS array members that will be the cache mask of the CPU.
```

Author: OK,  I will use that

> setup cache mask array MSRs, which is refered as Class of Service(CLOS) array; select

Reviewer: ```suggestion
setup cache mask array MSRs, which is refered as Class of Service (CLOS) array; select
```

Author: OK

one of the CLOS array for the CPU, that will be the cache mask of the CPU.

> ACRN integrated the usage of CAT into vm configuration. The CLOS array must be defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ACRN integrated the usage of CAT into VM configuration. The CLOS array must be defined
```

Reviewer 2: change "integrated" to "integrates"

Author: Fixed

> at the board config source code, and the VM need to specify which CLOS to use in its vm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the board config source code, and the VM needs to specify which CLOS to use in its VM
```

Author: Fixed

> config data. If the platform has CAT, the CLOS array will be write to CLOS MSRs at cpu

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
config data. If the platform supports CAT, the CLOS array will be written to the CLOS MSRs at CPU
```

Author: Fixed

init time, and the VM will set CLOS for VCPU at VM launch time.
The details is shown in :numref:`acrn-cat-hld`:

.. figure:: images/acrn_cat_hld.png
   :align: center
   :name: acrn-cat-hld

   CAT Support on ACRN

> Tuning CAT at HV debug shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tuning CAT in HV debug shell
```

Author: Fixed

############################

> When at ACRN HV debug shell, user can use 'cpuid', 'wrmsr/rdmsr' debug commands to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When at ACRN HV debug shell, user can use ``cpuid``, ``wrmsr/rdmsr`` debug commands to
```

Reviewer 2: adding to Geoffroy's suggestion, change the beginning of the sentence to:
```
From the ACRN HV debug shell, you can use ...
```

Author: OK

> enumarate CAT capability and tune CAT parameters. We will use UP2 board as an example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
enumerate CAT capability and tune CAT parameters.
```

Author: OK, I will use that

> the UP2 can use its serial port for HV shell, how to setup UP2 serial port please refer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the UP2 board's serial port for the HV shell, (refer
```

Author: OK, I will use that

> to `Getting started guide for UP2 board <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/getting-started/up2.html>`

Reviewer: Use :ref:`getting-started-up2` instead of a link to the webpage.

> to `Getting started guide for UP2 board <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/getting-started/up2.html>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to :ref:`getting-started-up2` for setup instructions).
```

Author: OK

> #. Check CAT ability with cupid, first run 'cpuid 0x10 0x0', the return value ebx[bit 2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Check CAT ability with ``cpuid``, first run ``cpuid 0x10 0x0``, the return value ``ebx[bit 2]``
```

>    report the L2 CAT is supported. Then run 'cpuid 0x10 0x2' to query L2 CAT capability,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   report the L2 CAT is supported. Then run ``cpuid 0x10 0x2`` to query L2 CAT capability,
```

   the return eax[bit 4:0] report cache mask has 8 bit, edx[bit 15:0] report 4 CLOS are
   supported

   .. code-block:: none

>      ACRN:\>cpuid 0x10 0x0

Reviewer: I believe this block needs to be aligned with the 'c' from `code-block`

Reviewer 2: By convention, the code block contents should be indented as Geoffroy mentions, but it will work as written.

     cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x0, 0x0:0x4:0x0:0x0

     ACRN:\>cpuid 0x10 0x2
     cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x2, 0x7:0x0:0x0:0x3

> #. Check pcpu ids of each VM, the 'vcpu_list' shows that VM0 is running on PCPU0,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Check PCPU IDs of each VM, the ``vcpu_list`` shows that VM0 is running on PCPU0,
```

   and VM1 is running on PCPU1

   .. code-block:: none

     ACRN:\>vcpu_list

     VM ID    PCPU ID    VCPU ID    VCPU ROLE    VCPU STATE
     =====    =======    =======    =========    ==========
       0         0          0        PRIMARY       Running
       1         1          0        PRIMARY       Running

> #. Set CLOS with wrmsr <reg_num> <value>, we want VM1 to use the lower 6 ways of cache,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Set CLOS with ``wrmsr <reg_num> <value>``, we want VM1 to use the lower 6 ways of cache,
```

   so CLOS0 is set to 0xc0 for the upper 2 ways, and CLOS1 is set to 0x3f for the lower
   6 ways.

   .. code-block:: none

     ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd10  0xc0
     ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd11  0x3f

#. Attach COS1 to PCPU1, because MSR IA32_PQR_ASSOC [bit 63:32], so write 0x100000000

>    to it ti use CLOS1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   to it to use CLOS1
```

   .. code-block:: none

     ACRN:\>wrmsr   –p1   0xc8f    0x100000000

Configure CAT for VM with VM Configuration
##########################################

> #. CAT on ACRN can be enabled and configured by modifying source code, so the first

Reviewer 2: Is this the only way to enable CAT on ACRN?  (No Kconfig option to set?)  Modifying the ACRN source code to enable options doesn't seem to be a sustainable approach to maintain customer configuration information.

Author: Hi, Kinder, we will update this DOC as soon as Kconfig can be used for CAT feature

Reviewer 2: OK, should we wait for that or merge the document as it is and submit a Kconfig fix later?

Reviewer: As I understand it, modifying the source code is the only option for now. If true, we should merge this as it is today. We can update the doc once a Kconfig-based mechanism exists for this.

>    step is clone the ACRN source code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   step is to clone the ACRN source code (if you haven't' already):
```

Author: OK

   .. code-block:: none

     $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor.git
     $ cd acrn-hypervisor/hypervisor

#. The predefined cache masks can be found at

>    ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/$(CONFIG_BOARD)/board.c``, for UP2 board, that is

Reviewer: You are already in the `hypervisor` folder as per the code-block above, can you either change the `cd` statement above or fix the path in this section?

Author: Sorry, we should at the root director, acrn-hypervisor/
 Fixed

Reviewer 2: Doesn't look like it's fixed?

Author: +      $ cd acrn-hypervisor
+
+#. The predefined cache masks can be found at
+   ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/$(CONFIG_BOARD)/board.c``, for UP2 board, that is

We were in acrn-hypervisor/hypervisor before, that was wrong. And we are in acrn-hypervisor/ now. That is correct.

Author: Seems this comment has not been marked 'Outdated', but in fact it is. Do I have made some mistake?

Reviewer: I'm not sure why it's not marked `Outdated` (possibly because you fixed it by changing a line that is not the one I commented on)... but anyway, this is fixed as far as I'm concerned!

   ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/apl-up2/board.c``, you can change the mask values,

>    but note that, CLOS mask must has continuous bits, or #GP can be triggered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   but note that the CLOS mask must have contiguous bits, or a #GP fault can be triggered.
```

Author: Fixed

   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 3,7,11,15

     struct platform_clos_info platform_clos_array[4] = {
             {
                     .clos_mask = 0xff,
                     .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_0,
             },
             {
                     .clos_mask = 0xff,
                     .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_1,
             },
             {
                     .clos_mask = 0xff,
                     .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_2,
             },
             {
                     .clos_mask = 0xff,
                     .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_3,
             },
     };

> #. Set up CLOS at the VM config. If you want a VM use one of the CLOSs, You need to find its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Set up CLOS at the VM config. If you want a VM to use one of the CLOSs, you need to find its
```

Author: Fixed

>    configuration data and modify it. We will take SOS on sharing mode as an example, its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   configuration data and modify it. We will take SOS on sharing mode as an example. Its
```

Author: Fixed

   configuration data can be found at ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/sharing_config.c``

   .. code-block:: none
     :emphasize-lines: 5,6

     struct acrn_vm_config vm_configs[CONFIG_MAX_VM_NUM] __aligned(PAGE_SIZE) = {
             {
                     .type = SOS_VM,
                     .name = SOS_VM_CONFIG_NAME,
                     .guest_flags = SOS_VM_CONFIG_GUEST_FLAGS | CLOS_REQUIRED,
                     .clos = 1,
                     .memory = {
                             .start_hpa = 0x0UL,
                             .size = CONFIG_SOS_RAM_SIZE,
                     },
                     .os_config = {
                             .name = SOS_VM_CONFIG_OS_NAME,
                     },
             },
     };

#. Build the ACRN hypervisor and copy the artifact ``acrn.efi`` to the

>    ``/boot`` directory, how to build please refer to `Build ACRN from Source <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/getting-started/building-from-source.html#>`

Reviewer: We shouldn't put `acrn.efi` directly in `/boot`, instead we need to instruct people to 1) make sure the ESP is mounted under `/boot` and 2) put `acrn.efi` under `/boot/EFI/acrn/`

Reviewer 2: When linking to ACRN documentation, you should use :ref: (and use the label at the top of the .rst file) rather than a hard URL:
```suggestion
   ``/boot`` directory, see  :ref:`getting-started-building` but building instructions.
```

Author: OK

>    ``/boot`` directory, how to build please refer to `Build ACRN from Source <https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/getting-started/building-from-source.html#>`

Reviewer: Use the `:ref:` directive instead here, i.e. :ref:`getting-started-building`

.. _using_cat_up2:

Using CAT on UP2
################

The UP Squared board `(UP2) <https://up-board.org/upsquared/specifications/>`_
is an x86 maker board based on the Intel Apollo Lake platform and supports
Cache Allocation Technology (CAT). With this feature, the usage of cache can be
restricted to each VM. ACRN hypervisor can do that by giving each VM a cache mask,
so that the VM will not evict the masked cache lines, as shown in :numref:
`cache-mask-vm`:

.. figure:: images/using_cat_up2.png
   :align: center
   :name: cache-mask-vm

   Cache usage with Cache Mask

CAT Support on ACRN
*******************

> As described at ``Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described at `Intel |reg| 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual <https://software.intel.com/en-us/download/intel-64-and-ia-32-architectures-sdm-combined-volumes-3a-3b-3c-and-3d-system-programming-guide>`_,
```

Author: OK, I will use that

> chapter 17.17, volume 3. There are 3 steps to use CAT:

Reviewer: Isn't that 17.19 rather?

Author: Yes, that is 17.19, in https://software.intel.com/en-us/download/intel-64-and-ia-32-architectures-sdm-combined-volumes-3a-3b-3c-and-3d-system-programming-guide

      cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x0, 0x0:0x4:0x0:0x0

      ACRN:\>cpuid 0x10 0x2
      cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x2, 0x7:0x0:0x0:0x3

#. Check PCPU IDs of each VM, the ``vcpu_list`` shows that VM0 is running on PCPU0,
   and VM1 is running on PCPU1

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>vcpu_list

      VM ID    PCPU ID    VCPU ID    VCPU ROLE    VCPU STATE
      =====    =======    =======    =========    ==========
        0         0          0        PRIMARY       Running
        1         1          0        PRIMARY       Running

#. Set CLOS with ``wrmsr <reg_num> <value>``, we want VM1 to use the lower 6 ways of cache,
   so CLOS0 is set to 0xc0 for the upper 2 ways, and CLOS1 is set to 0x3f for the lower
   6 ways.

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd10  0xc0
      ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd11  0x3f

#. Attach COS1 to PCPU1, because MSR IA32_PQR_ASSOC [bit 63:32], so write 0x100000000
   to it to use CLOS1

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>wrmsr   –p1   0xc8f    0x100000000

Configure CAT for VM with VM Configuration
##########################################

#. CAT on ACRN can be enabled and configured by modifying source code, so the first

>    step is to clone the ACRN source code (if you haven't' already):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   step is to clone the ACRN source code (if you haven't already):
```

Author: Sorry, fixed

.. _using_cat_up2:

Using CAT on UP2
################

The UP Squared board `(UP2) <https://up-board.org/upsquared/specifications/>`_
is an x86 maker board based on the Intel Apollo Lake platform and supports
Cache Allocation Technology (CAT). With this feature, the usage of cache can be
restricted to each VM. ACRN hypervisor can do that by giving each VM a cache mask,
so that the VM will not evict the masked cache lines, as shown in :numref:
`cache-mask-vm`:

.. figure:: images/using_cat_up2.png
   :align: center
   :name: cache-mask-vm

   Cache usage with Cache Mask

CAT Support on ACRN
*******************

> As described at `Intel |reg| 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual

Reviewer: My apologies @taoyuhong , it turns out my suggestion to change the (R) sign into `|reg|` wasn't a good one... Sphinx/docutils do not support such substitutions... see https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/issues/2793 :(

Author: OK

Author: We can use 'Intel (R)', thank you Geoff

<https://software.intel.com/en-us/download/intel-64-and-ia-32-architectures-sdm-combined-volumes-3a-3b-3c-and-3d-system-programming-guide>`_,
chapter 17.19, volume 3. There are 3 steps to use CAT:

> 1.Detecting the CAT capability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Detect the CAT capability.
```

Author: Fixed

> 2.Setup cache mask array MSRs, which is refered as Class of Service (CLOS) array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Setup cache mask array MSRs, which is referred to as Class of Service (CLOS) array.
```

Author: OK， fixed

> 3.Select one of the CLOS array for the CPU, that will be the cache mask of the CPU.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Select one of the CLOS array for the CPU, that will be the cache mask of the CPU.
```

Author: Fixed

ACRN integrates the usage of CAT into VM configuration. The CLOS array must be defined

> in the board config source code, and the VM needs to specify which CLOS to use in its vm

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the board config source code, and the VM needs to specify which CLOS to use in its VM
```

Author: Fixed

config data. If the platform supports CAT, the CLOS array will be written to the CLOS MSRs

> at cpu init time, and the VM will set CLOS for VCPU at VM launch time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
at CPU init time, and the VM will set CLOS for VCPU at VM launch time.
```

Author: OK, Fixed

> The details is shown in :numref:`acrn-cat-hld`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The details are shown in :numref:`acrn-cat-hld`:
```

Author: Fixed

Author: Fixed

.. figure:: images/acrn_cat_hld.png
   :align: center
   :name: acrn-cat-hld

   CAT Support on ACRN

Tuning CAT in HV debug shell
############################

From the ACRN HV debug shell, you can use ``cpuid``, ``wrmsr/rdmsr`` debug commands to
enumerate CAT capability and tune CAT parameters. You can use the UP2 board's serial port
for the HV shell (refer to :ref:`getting-started-up2` for setup instructions).

> #. Check CAT ability with cupid, first run ``cpuid 0x10 0x0``, the return value ebx[bit 2]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Check CAT ability with ``cpuid``. First run ``cpuid 0x10 0x0``, the return value ebx[bit 2]
```

Author: Fixed

>    report the L2 CAT is supported. Then run ``cpuid 0x10 0x2`` to query L2 CAT capability,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   reports the L2 CAT is supported. Then run ``cpuid 0x10 0x2`` to query L2 CAT capability,
```

Author: Fixed

>    the return eax[bit 4:0] report cache mask has 8 bit, edx[bit 15:0] report 4 CLOS are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the return value eax[bit 4:0] reports the cache mask has 8 bit, and edx[bit 15:0] reports 4 CLOS are
```

Author: Thanks, that is good, use it...

>    supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   supported, as shown below:
```

Author: Thanks, I will use that

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>cpuid 0x10 0x0
      cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x0, 0x0:0x4:0x0:0x0

      ACRN:\>cpuid 0x10 0x2
      cpuid leaf: 0x10, subleaf: 0x2, 0x7:0x0:0x0:0x3

#. Check PCPU IDs of each VM, the ``vcpu_list`` shows that VM0 is running on PCPU0,

>    and VM1 is running on PCPU1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and VM1 is running on PCPU1:
```

Author: Fixed

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>vcpu_list

      VM ID    PCPU ID    VCPU ID    VCPU ROLE    VCPU STATE
      =====    =======    =======    =========    ==========
        0         0          0        PRIMARY       Running
        1         1          0        PRIMARY       Running

#. Set CLOS with ``wrmsr <reg_num> <value>``, we want VM1 to use the lower 6 ways of cache,
   so CLOS0 is set to 0xc0 for the upper 2 ways, and CLOS1 is set to 0x3f for the lower

>    6 ways.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   6 ways:
```

Author: OK, Fixed

   .. code-block:: none

      ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd10  0xc0
      ACRN:\>wrmsr  -p1 0xd11  0x3f

> #. Attach COS1 to PCPU1, because MSR IA32_PQR_ASSOC [bit 63:32], so write 0x100000000

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Attach COS1 to PCPU1. Because MSR IA32_PQR_ASSOC [bit 63:32], we'll write 0x100000000
```

Author: Thanks, I will use that

   step is to clone the ACRN source code (if you haven't already):

   .. code-block:: none

      $ git clone https://github.com/projectacrn/acrn-hypervisor.git
      $ cd acrn-hypervisor

#. The predefined cache masks can be found at
   ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/$(CONFIG_BOARD)/board.c``, for UP2 board, that is
   ``hypervisor/arch/x86/configs/apl-up2/board.c``, you can change the mask values,
   but note that the CLOS mask must have continuous bits, or a #GP fault can be triggered.

   .. code-block:: none
      :emphasize-lines: 3,7,11,15

      struct platform_clos_info platform_clos_array[4] = {
              {
                      .clos_mask = 0xff,
                      .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_0,
              },
              {
                      .clos_mask = 0xff,
                      .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_1,
              },
              {
                      .clos_mask = 0xff,
                      .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_2,
              },
              {
                      .clos_mask = 0xff,
                      .msr_index = MSR_IA32_L2_MASK_3,
              },
      };

> #. Set up CLOS at the VM config. If you want a VM to use one of the CLOSs, you need to find its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Set up CLOS in the VM config. If you want a VM to use one of the CLOSs, you need to find its
```

Author: OK

Author: Hi, Kinder. I think we can merge the Doc this time，and  submit the Kconfig version in the future. Because the Kconfig fix relays on VM configuration code to be established. And the Doc can be helpful for people to debug CAT  features on ACRN.
